---
date: '2017-06-27'
published: true
title: On Java 8 And The Concurrent Python Developer Retreat
url: /2017/06/27/on-java-8-and-the-concurrent-python-developer-retreat
---


For many years I've been getting requests for some kind of sequel to *Thinking
in Java, 4th Edition*. Over two years ago, I finally decided to "pull together
something quickly." After all, how much time have I spent writing about the
language? I should be getting pretty fast by now.

Self-delusion knows no bounds. No matter how many books I write, every one
seems to take longer than the previous ones, not shorter. I hope this is
because I'm getting more meticulous.

Another factor is that Java 8 is a dramatic departure from previous versions
of Java. It has pulled a major rabbit out of a hat with the introduction of
lambdas and functional programming---perhaps not as pure as you expect from a
real functional language, but a huge step forward nonetheless. Along with
`CompletableFuture`s and `Stream`s,  Java 8 is a radical improvement in the
experience of programming with Java.

I've rolled the book out very slowly; for the last couple of months it's been
in beta to make sure there were no glitches in the delivery or reading
experience, but it is now officially released.

You can find it at [www.OnJava8.com](http://onjava8.com).

This book is far too large to publish as a single print volume, and my intent
has always been to only publish it as an eBook. Color syntax highlighting for
code listings is, alone, worth the cost of admission. Searchability, font
resizing or text-to-voice for the vision-impaired, the fact you can always
keep it with you---there are so many benefits to eBooks it's hard to name them
all.

Anyone buying this book needs a computer to run the programs and write code,
and the eBook reads nicely on a computer (I was also surprised to discover it
reads tolerably well on a phone). However, the best reading experience is on a
tablet computer. Tablets are inexpensive enough you can now buy one for less
than you'd pay for an equivalent print version of this book (which, note, does
not exist). It's much easier to read a tablet in bed (for example) than trying
to manage the pages of a physical book, especially one this big. When working
at your computer, you don't have to hold the pages open when using a tablet at
your side. It might feel different at first, but I think you'll find the
benefits far outweigh the discomfort of adapting.

I've done the research, and Google Play Books provides a very nice reading
experience on every platform, including Linux and iOS devices. As an
experiment, I've decided to try publishing exclusively through [Google
Books](http://onjava8.com).

# The Concurrent Python Developer Retreat

I will be attending GopherCon in Denver with my friend Luciano Ramalho (Author
of Fluent Python), and afterwards he'll be coming with me to my home in
Crested Butte, Colorado where we'll be holding the Concurrent Python Developer
retreat, July 16-19 2017. This will focus on all the aspects of concurrency in
Python, as part of the development work for my book project [Concurrent
Python](http://www.ConcurrentPython.com). This will be a free ebook, available now
and throughout development (it might also turn into a print book if the
interest is there). The target audience is people who know Python but don't
know anything about concurrency, so if that's you, please consider joining the
retreat. You can find out more, and register, [here](http://www.Developer-Retreat.com).